model as before to achieve that. That is, we can create a hash
functiond, which maps fto a bit array of size mby scaling
itsoutputas d=⌊f(x)∗m⌋Assuch,wecanuse dasahash
function just like any other in a Bloom filter. This has the
advantage of fbeing trained to map most keys to the higher
rangeofbitpositionsandnon-keystothelowerrangeofbit
positions (see Figure9(b)). A more detailed explanation of the
approach is given in Appendix E.
5.2 Results
In order to test this idea experimentally, we explore the appli-
cationofan existenceindexforkeepingtrack ofblacklisted
phishing URLs. We consider data from Google’s transparency
reportasoursetofkeystokeeptrackof.Thisdatasetconsists
of1.7MuniqueURLs.Weuseanegativesetthatisamixtureof
random (valid) URLs and whitelisted URLs that could be mis-
taken forphishing pages.We splitour negativeset randomly
intotrain,validationandtest sets.Wetrainacharacter-level
RNN(GRU[ 24],inparticular)topredictwhichsetaURLbe-
longsto;weset τbasedonthevalidationsetandalsoreport
the FPR on the test set.
AnormalBloomfilterwithadesired1%FPRrequires2.04MB.
Weconsidera16-dimensionalGRUwitha32-dimensionalem-
bedding for each character; this model is 0.0259MB. Whenbuilding a comparable learned index, we set
τfor 0.5% FPR
on the validation set; this gives a FNR of 55%. (The FPR on
thetestsetis0.4976%,validatingthechosenthreshold.)Asde-scribedabove,thesizeofourBloomfilterscaleswiththeFNR.
Thus, we find that our model plus the spillover Bloom filter
uses 1.31MB, a 36% reduction in size. If we want to enforce
an overall FPR of 0.1%, we have a FNR of 76%, which brings
thetotalBloomfiltersizedownfrom3.06MBto2.59MB,a15%
reduction in memory. We observe this general relationship
inFigure10.Interestingly,weseehowdifferentsizemodels
balance the accuracy vs. memory trade-off differently.
Weconsiderbrieflythecasewherethereiscovariateshift
in our query distribution that we have not addressed in the
model. When using validation and test sets with only random
URLs we find that we can save 60% over a Bloom filter with a
FPR of 1%. When using validation and test sets with only the
whitelistedURLswefindthatwecansave21%overaBloom
filterwithaFPRof1%.Ultimately,thechoiceofnegativesetis
application specific and covariate shift could be more directly
addressed,buttheseexperimentsareintendedtogiveintuition
for how the approach adapts to different situations.
Clearly, the more accurate our model is, the better the sav-
ings in Bloom filter size. One interesting property of this is
thatthereisnoreasonthatourmodelneedstousethesame
features as the Bloom filter. For example, significant research
has worked on using ML to predict if a webpage is a phish-
ingpage[ 10,15].AdditionalfeatureslikeWHOISdataorIP
informationcouldbeincorporatedinthemodel,improvingac-
curacy, decreasing Bloom filter size, and keeping the property
of no false negatives.
Further, we give additional results following the approach
in Section 5.1.2 in Appendix E..FNPSZ'PPUQSJOU	.FHBCZUFT
#MPPN'JMUFS
8&8&
8&

'BMTF1PTJUJWF3BUF	
Figure10:LearnedBloomfilterimprovesmemoryfoot-
printatawiderangeofFPRs.(Here WistheRNNwidth
andEis the embedding size for each character.)
6 RELATED WORK
The idea of learned indexes builds upon a wide range of re-
search in machine learning and indexing techniques. In the
following, we highlight the most important related areas.
B-Trees and variants: Over the last decades a variety
of different index structures have been proposed [ 36], such
as B+-trees [ 17] for disk based systems and T-trees [ 46]o r
balanced/red-blacktrees[ 16,20]forin-memorysystems.As
the original main-memory trees had poor cache behavior, sev-
eral cache conscious B+-tree variants were proposed, such as
the CSB+-tree [ 58]. Similarly, there has been work on making
use of SIMD instructions such as FAST [ 44] or even taking
advantageofGPUs[ 43,44,61].Moreover,manyofthese(in-
memory) indexes are able to reduce their storage-needs by
usingoffsetsratherthanpointersbetweennodes.Thereexists
also a vast array of research on index structures for text, such
astries/radix-trees[ 19,31,45],orotherexoticindexstructures,
which combine ideas from B-Trees and tries [48].
However, all of these approaches are orthogonal to the
idea of learned indexes as none of them learn from the data
distributiontoachieveamorecompactindexrepresentation
or performance gains. At the same time, like with our hybrid
indexes, it might be possible to more tightly integrate theexisting hardware-conscious index strategies with learned
models for further performance gains.
Since B+-trees consume significant memory, there has also
been a lot of work in compressing indexes, such as prefix/suf-
fix truncation, dictionary compression, key normalization [ 33,
36,55], or hybrid hot/cold indexes [ 75]. However, we pre-
sented a radical different way to compress indexes, which—
dependent on the data distribution—is able to achieve orders-
of-magnitude smaller indexes and faster look-up times andpotentially even changes the storage complexity class (e.g.,
O(n)t oO(1) ). Interestingly though, some of the existing com-
pressiontechniquesarecomplimentarytoourapproachand
could help to further improve the efficiency. For example, dic-
tionary compression can be seen as a form of embedding (i.e.,
representing a string as a unique integer).
Research 6: Storage & Indexing
SIGMOD’18, June 10-15, 2018, Houston, TX, USA
499