)BTI
'VODUJPO,FZ.PEFM,FZ	B
5SBEJUJPOBM)BTI.BQ 	C
-FBSOFE)BTI.BQ
Figure 7: Traditional Hash-map vs Learned Hash-map
4.1 The Hash-Model Index
Surprisingly,learningtheCDFofthekeydistributionisone
potential way to learn a better hash function. However, in
contrastto rangeindexes,we donotaimto storetherecords
compactly or in strictly sorted order. Rather we can scale
the CDF by the targeted size Mof the Hash-map and use
h(K)=F(K)∗M,withkey Kasourhash-function.Ifthemodel
FperfectlylearnedtheempiricalCDFofthekeys,noconflicts
wouldexist.Furthermore,thehash-functionisorthogonalto
theactualHash-maparchitectureandcanbecombinedwith
separate chaining or any other Hash-map type.
Forthemodel,wecanagainleveragetherecursivemodel
architecture from the previous section. Obviously, like before,
there exists a trade-off between the size of the index and per-
formance, which is influenced by the model and dataset.
Note, that how inserts, look-ups, and conflicts are handled
is dependent on the Hash-map architecture. As a result, the
benefits learned hash functions provide over traditional hash
functions, which map keys to a uniformly distributed space
depend on two key factors: (1) How accurately the model rep-
resentstheobservedCDF.Forexample,ifthedataisgenerated
byauniformdistribution,asimplelinearmodelwillbeable
tolearnthegeneraldatadistribution,buttheresultinghash
functionwillnotbebetterthananysufficientlyrandomized
hashfunction.(2)Hashmaparchitecture:dependingonthe
architecture, implementation details, the payload (i.e., value),
theconflictresolutionpolicy,aswellashowmuchmoremem-
ory(i.e.,slots)willorcanbeallocated,significantlyinfluences
the performance. For example, for small keys and small or no
values,traditionalhashfunctionswithCuckoohashingwill
probably work well, whereas larger payloads or distributed
hash maps might benefit more from avoiding conflicts, and
thus from learned hash functions.
4.2 Results
We evaluated the conflict rate of learned hash functions over
thethreeintegerdatasetsfromtheprevioussection.Asour
modelhash-functionsweusedthe2-stageRMImodelsfrom
theprevioussectionwith100kmodelsonthe2ndstageand
withoutanyhiddenlayers.Asthebaselineweusedasimple
MurmurHash3-likehash-functionandcomparedthenumber
ofconflictsforatablewiththesamenumberofslotsasrecords.
AscanbeseeninFigure8,thelearnedmodelscanreduce
the number of conflicts by up to 77% over our datasets by
learningtheempiricalCDFatareasonablecost;theexecution

  



  	
 		
	

  	 

  
 	
Figure 8: Reduction of Conflicts
time is the same as the model execution time in Figure 4,
around 25-40ns.
Howbeneficialthereductionofconflictsisgiventhemodel
execution time depends on the Hash-map architecture, pay-
load,andmanyotherfactors.Forexample,ourexperiments
(seeAppendixB)showthatforaseparatechainingHash-map
architecturewith 20Byte recordslearned hashfunctions can
reduce the wasted amount of storage by up to 80% at an in-
creaseofonly13nsinlatencycomparedtorandomhashing.
The reason why it only increases the latency by 13ns and not
40ns is, that often fewer conflicts also yield to fewer cache
misses,andthusbetterperformance.Ontheotherhand,for
verysmallpayloadsCuckoo-hashingwithstandardhash-maps
probablyremainsthebestchoice.H owever,asweshowinAp-
pendixC,forlargerpayloadsachained-hashmapwithlearned
hashfunctioncanbefasterthancuckoo-hashingand/ortra-
ditional randomized hashing. Finally, we see the biggest po-
tential for distributed settings. For example, NAM-DB [ 74]
employs a hash function to look-up data on remote machines
usingRDMA.Becauseoftheextremelyhighcostforeverycon-
flict(i.e.,everyconflictrequiresanadditionalRDMArequest
which is in the order of micro-seconds), the model execution
time is negligible and even small reductions in the conflictrate can significantly improve the overall performance. To
conclude, learned hash functions are independent of the used
Hash-map architecture and depending on the Hash-map ar-
chitecture their complexity may or may not pay off.
5 EXISTENCE INDEX
ThelastcommonindextypeofDBMSareexistenceindexes,
mostimportantly Bloomfilters, aspaceefficient probabilistic
datastructuretotestwhetheranelementisamemberofaset.
They are commonly used to determine if a key exists on cold
storage.Forexample,Bigtableusesthemtodetermineifakey
is contained in an SSTable [23].
Internally, Bloom filters use a bit array of size mandk
hashfunctions,whicheachmapakeytooneofthe marray
positions (see Figure9(a)). To add an element to the set, a key
is fed to the khash-functions and the bits of the returned
positions are set to 1. To test if a key is a member of the set,
thekeyisagainfedintothe khashfunctionstoreceive karray
positions. If any of the bits at those kpositions is 0, the key
isnotamemberofaset.Inotherwords,aBloomfilterdoes
guaranteethatthereexists nofalsenegatives,buthaspotential
false positives.
WhileBloomfiltersarehighlyspace-efficient,theycanstill
occupy a significant amount of memory. For example for one
billionrecordsroughly ≈1.76Gigabytesareneeded.ForaFPR
of 0.01% we would require ≈2.23 Gigabytes. There have been
severalattemptstoimprovetheefficiencyofBloomfilters[ 52],
but the general observation remains.
Research 6: Storage & Indexing
SIGMOD’18, June 10-15, 2018, Houston, TX, USA
497