IIIIII.PEFM
:FT#MPPN
੗MUFS/P
,FZ
:FTLFZLFZ LFZ LFZ LFZ LFZ
.PEFM .PEFM .PEFM III	B
 5SBEJUJPOBM#MPPN'JMUFS*OTFSUJPO 	C
 -FBSOFE#MPPN'JMUFS*OTFSUJPO 	D
 #MPPN੗MUFSTBTBDMBTTJ੗DBUJPOQSPCMFN
Figure 9: Bloom filters Architectures
Yet,ifthereissomestructuretodeterminewhatisinside
versusoutsidetheset,whichcanbelearned,itmightbepossi-
bletoconstructmoreefficientrepresentations.Interestingly,
for existence indexes for database systems, the latency and
spacerequirementsareusuallyquitedifferentthanwhatwe
saw before. Given the high latency to access cold storage (e.g.,
disk or even band), we can afford more complex models while
the main objective is to minimize the space for the index and
thenumber offalsepositives.We outlinetwopotentialways
to build existence indexes using learned models.
5.1 Learned Bloom filters
Whilebothrangeandpointindexeslearnthedistributionof
keys,existenceindexesneedtolearnafunctionthatseparates
keys from everything else. Stated differently, a good hashfunction for a point index is one with few collisions among
keys,whereasagoodhashfunctionforaBloomfilterwouldbeonethathaslotsofcollisionsamongkeysandlotsofcollisions
among non-keys, but few collisions of keys and non-keys. We
consider below how to learn such a function fand how to
incorporate it into an existence index.
WhiletraditionalBloomfiltersguaranteeafalsenegative
rate(FNR)ofzeroandaspecificfalsepositiverate(FPR)forany
setofquerieschosena-priori[ 22],wefollowthenotionthatwe
wanttoprovideaspecificFPRfor realisticqueries inparticular
while maintaining a FNR of zero. That is, we measure the FPR
over a heldout dataset of queries, as is common in evaluating
MLsystems[ 30].Whilethesedefinitionsdiffer,webelievethe
assumption that we can observe the distribution of queries,
e.g.,fromhistoricallogs,holdsinmanyapplications,especially
within databases5.
Traditionally,existenceindexesmakenouseofthedistri-
butionofkeysnorhowtheydifferfromnon-keys,butlearned
Bloom filters can. For example, if our database included all in-
tegersxfor0≤x<n,theexistenceindexcouldbecomputed
inconstanttimeandwithalmostnomemoryfootprintbyjust
computing f(x)≡1[0≤x<n].
In considering the data distribution for ML purposes, we
must consider a dataset of non-keys. In this work, we con-
siderthecasewherenon-keyscomefromobservablehistori-
cal queries and we assume that future queries come from the
same distribution as historical queries. When this assumption
doesnothold,onecoulduserandomlygeneratedkeys,non-
keysgeneratedbyamachinelearningmodel[ 34],importance
5We would like to thank MichaelMitzenmacher for valuable conversations in
articulating the relationship between these definitions as well as improving the
overall chapter through his insightful comments.weighting to directly address covariate shift [ 18], or adversar-
ialtrainingforrobustness[ 65];weleavethisasfuturework.
We denote the set of keys by Kand the set of non-keys by U.
5.1.1 Bloom filters as a Classification Problem. Onewayto
frametheexistenceindexisasabinaryprobabilisticclassifica-
tion task. That is, we want to learn a model fthat can predict
ifaquery xisakeyornon-key.Forexample,forstringswe
can train a recurrent neural network (RNN) or convolutional
neural network (CNN) [ 37,64] withD={(xi,yi=1 )|xi∈
K}∪{(xi,yi=0 )|xi∈U }. Because this is a binary classifi-
cation task, our neural network has a sigmoid activation to
produceaprobabilityandistrainedtominimizethelogloss:
L=/summationtext
(x,y)∈Dylogf(x)+(1−y)log(1−f(x)).
Theoutputof f(x)canbeinterpretedastheprobabilitythat
xisakeyinourdatabase.Thus,wecanturnthemodelinto
an existence index by choosing a threshold τabove which we
will assume that the key exists in our database. Unlike Bloom
filters, our model will likely have a non-zero FPR and FNR; in
fact, as the FPR goes down, the FNR will go up. In order to
preservethenofalsenegativesconstraintofexistenceindexes,
we create an overflow Bloom filter. That is, we consider K−τ=
{x∈K|f(x)<τ}tobethesetoffalsenegativesfrom fand
createaBloom filterforthissubsetof keys.Wecanthen run
our existence index as in Figure 9(c): if f(x)≥τ, the key is
believed to exist; otherwise, check the overflow Bloom filter.
Onequestionishowtoset τsothatourlearnedBloomfilter
has the desired FPR p∗. We denote the FPR of our model by
FPRτ≡/summationtext
x∈˜U1(f(x)>τ)
|˜U|where˜Uisaheld-outsetofnon-keys.
We denote the FPR of our overflow Bloom filter by FPRB. The
overall FPR of our system therefore is FPRO=FPRτ+( 1−
FPRτ)FPRB[53]. Forsimplicity, weset FPRτ=FPRB=p∗
2so
that FPR O≤p∗. We tune τto achieve this FPR on ˜U.
Thissetupiseffectiveinthatthelearnedmodelcanbefairly
smallrelativetothesizeofthedata.Further,becauseBloom
filters scale with the size of key set, the overflow Bloom filter
willscalewiththeFNR.Wewillseeexperimentallythatthis
combinationiseffectiveindecreasingthememoryfootprint
of the existence index. Finally, the learned model computa-
tion can benefit from machine learning accelerators, whereas
traditionalBloomfilterstendtobeheavilydependentonthe
random access latency of the memory system.
5.1.2 Bloom filters with Model-Hashes. Analternativeap-
proachtobuildingexistenceindexesistolearnahashfunction
withthe goaltomaximize collisionsamongkeysand among
non-keyswhileminimizingcollisionsofkeysandnon-keys.
Interestingly, we can use the same probabilistic classification
Research 6: Storage & Indexing
SIGMOD’18, June 10-15, 2018, Houston, TX, USA
498